OIE by default google authenticator java (#3152)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/authenticators-google-authenticator/main/java/enrollmentintegrationsteps.md

### 1: Build a sign-in page on the client

Build a sign-in page that capture's the user's name and password, as shown in the following example.

![Basic sign-in dialog](/img/authenticators/java-authenticators-signinform.png)

### 2: Authenticate the user credentials

Add the following code to initiate the sign-in flow using the credentials collected from the user.

```java
// create an IDX Authentication Wrapper (can be an application scoped singleton)
IDXAuthenticationWrapper idxAuthenticationWrapper = new IDXAuthenticationWrapper();

// Begin transaction
AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.begin(
        new RequestContext()
                .setIpAddress("11.22.333.4") // ip address of request
                .setUserAgent("Mozilla/5.0 ..."));

// The proceedContext needs to be persisted between interactions (e.g. stored in a HttpSession for web apps)
ProceedContext proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

> // Set the user's credentials

Author: ```suggestion
// Set the user's credentials.
```

            .findFirst() // find the first "otp" factor or throw an exception
            .orElseThrow(() -> {
                String availableFactors = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
                        .map(auth -> auth.getLabel() + " - " + auth.getType())
                        .collect(Collectors.joining(", "));
                return new RuntimeException("OTP factor not found, existing options: " + availableFactors);
            });

    // Update the response with the selected authenticator and send the result back to the server.
    authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.selectAuthenticator(proceedContext, authenticator);
```

### 5: Retrieve shared secret and QR Code

The next `AuthenticationResponse` object will contain information about the OTP factor and will contain a QR Code and shared secret.

> **NOTE:** the _shared secret_ is typically used when a QR code cannot be displayed or scanned.

Display the QR code and/or shared secret to the user, so they can register the factor with Google Authenticator.

```java
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getSharedSecret()
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getQrcode()
```

> Prompt the user for a OTP code, and continue the authentication flow:

Reviewer: But the text just stops here, Where's the rest of the flow?

### 1: Build a sign-in page on the client

Build a sign-in page that capture's the user's name and password, as shown in the following example.

![Basic sign-in dialog](/img/authenticators/java-authenticators-signinform.png)

### 2: Authenticate the user credentials

Add the following code to initiate the sign-in flow using the credentials collected from the user.

```java
// create an IDX Authentication Wrapper (can be an application scoped singleton)
IDXAuthenticationWrapper idxAuthenticationWrapper = new IDXAuthenticationWrapper();

// Begin transaction
AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.begin(
        new RequestContext()
                .setIpAddress("11.22.333.4") // ip address of request
                .setUserAgent("Mozilla/5.0 ..."));

// The proceedContext needs to be persisted between interactions (e.g. stored in a HttpSession for web apps)
ProceedContext proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

> // set the user's credentials

Author: ```suggestion
// Set the user's credentials
```

Query the `authenticationStatus` property of the `AuthenticationResponse` object returned by `authenticate` to discover the current status of the authentication process.

```java
// Update the context each time a request is made to Okta
// For web applications, ProceedContext must be persistent between requests.
proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

AuthenticationStatus authenticationStatus = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticationStatus();

switch (authenticationStatus) {
    case SUCCESS:
        … your code …
    case PASSWORD_EXPIRED:
        … your code …
}
```

### 4: Select a possible authenticator factor

You need to handle two other authenticator status values in addition to `SUCCESS` and `PASSWORD_EXPIRED` for an Okta org that is configured using this guide:

* `AWAITING_PROFILE_ENROLLMENT` that is covered in this section
* `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` that is covered in [the challenge flow section](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-challenge).

The names of the available authenticators are found in the `authenticators` collection of the `AuthenticationResponse`.

Display a selector with the list of available authenticators:

> > **Note:** The `isChallengeFlow` session variable is set to `false` if the user needs to enroll Google Authenticator first, and `true` if they have already done so.

Author: ```suggestion
```

```java
case AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION:

    // There are multiple potential factors, for this example we are going to
    // assume Google Authenticator (OTP) is used
    Authenticator authenticator = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
            .filter(auth -> auth.getType().equals("otp"))
            .findFirst() // find the first "otp" factor or throw an exception
            .orElseThrow(() -> {
                String availableFactors = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
                        .map(auth -> auth.getLabel() + " - " + auth.getType())
                        .collect(Collectors.joining(", "));
                return new RuntimeException("OTP factor not found, existing options: " + availableFactors);
            });

    // Tell Okta which factor was selected, and go back into the state machine with the new response
    authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.selectAuthenticator(proceedContext, authenticator);
```

### 5: Retrieve shared secret and QR Code

The next `AuthenticationResponse` object will contain information about the OTP factor and will contain a QR Code and shared secret.

> > **Note:** The shared secret is typically used when a QR code can't be displayed or scanned.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The shared secret is used when a QR code can't be displayed or scanned.
```

proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

AuthenticationStatus authenticationStatus = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticationStatus();

switch (authenticationStatus) {
    case SUCCESS:
        … your code …
    case PASSWORD_EXPIRED:
        … your code …
}
```

### 4: Select a possible authenticator factor

If you configured your Okta org correctly, you need to respond to two specific authenticator statuses to handle this scenario in addition to `SUCCESS` and `PASSWORD_EXPIRED`:

* `AWAITING_PROFILE_ENROLLMENT` that is covered in this section
* `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` that is covered in [the challenge flow section](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-challenge).

The names of the authenticators available for enrollment or challenge can be found in the `AuthenticationResponse` object's `authenticators` collection. Display a list of authenticators to select the Google Authenticator for enrollment.

> **Note:** The `isChallengeFlow` session variable is set to `false` if the user needs to enroll Google Authenticator first, and `true` if they have already done so.

```java
case AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION:

>     // There are multiple potential factors, for this example we are going to
>     // assume Google Authenticator (OTP) is used

Author: ```suggestion
    // This example assumes that Google Authenticator is the only OTP authenticator in Okta org policy.
```

### 1: Build a sign-in page on the client

> Build a sign-in page that capture's the user's name and password, as shown in the following example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Build a sign-in page that captures the user's name and password, as shown in the following example.
```

![Basic sign-in dialog](/img/authenticators/java-authenticators-signinform.png)

### 2: Authenticate the user credentials

After a user initiates the sign-in flow by entering their username and password and then clicking **Sign In**, add the following code:

```java
// create an IDX Authentication Wrapper (can be an application scoped singleton)
IDXAuthenticationWrapper idxAuthenticationWrapper = new IDXAuthenticationWrapper();

// begin transaction

> // The proceedContext needs to be persisted between interactions (e.g. stored in a HttpSession for web apps)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// The proceedContext needs to be persisted between interactions (for example, stored in a HttpSession for web apps)
```

Author: The proceed context is only used once on the next request and needs to be updated on each call

ProceedContext proceedContext = idxAuthenticationWrapper.begin().getProceedContext();

// set the user's credentials
AuthenticationOptions authenticationOptions = new AuthenticationOptions(username, password);

// start authentication flow
AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.authenticate(authenticationOptions, proceedContext);
```

### 3: Handle the response from the sign-in flow

> The `AuthenticationResponse` contains the current state of the authentication process, it could be a `SUCCESS` or may indicate more information is needed to complete the flow, for example, require an additional factor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `AuthenticationResponse` contains the current state of the authentication process. It could be a `SUCCESS` or may indicate more information is needed to complete the flow, for example, require an additional factor.
```

> The `AuthenticationResponse` contains the current state of the authentication process. It could be a `SUCCESS` or may indicate more information is needed to complete the flow, for example, require an additional factor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `AuthenticationResponse` contains the current state of the authentication process. It could be a `SUCCESS` or may indicate that more information is needed to complete the flow, for example, require an additional factor.
```

Query the `authenticationStatus` property of the `AuthenticationResponse` object returned by `authenticate` to discover the current status of the authentication process.

```java
// Update the context each time a request is made to Okta
// make sure it is persisted for web applications
proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

// get the authenticationStatus
AuthenticationStatus authenticationStatus = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticationStatus();

switch (authenticationStatus) {
    case SUCCESS:
        … your code …
    case PASSWORD_EXPIRED:
        … your code …
}
```

### 4: Select a possible authenticator factor

> If you configured your Okta org correctly, you need to respond to two specific authenticator statuses to handle this scenario in addition to `Success` and `PasswordExpired`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you configure your Okta org correctly, you need to respond to two specific authenticator statuses to handle this scenario in addition to `Success` and `PasswordExpired`:
```

> If you configure your Okta org correctly, you need to respond to two specific authenticator statuses to handle this scenario in addition to `Success` and `PasswordExpired`:

Reviewer: This looks like a leftover from the .net version here. Are the statuses called Success and PasswordExpired in Java?

* `AWAITING_PROFILE_ENROLLMENT` that is covered in this section
* `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` that is covered in [the challenge flow section](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-challenge).

> The names of the authenticators available for enrollment or challenge can be found in the `AuthenticationResponse` object's `authenticators` collection. Display a list of authenticators to select the Google Authenticator for enrollment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the names of the authenticators available for enrollment or challenge in the `AuthenticationResponse` object's `authenticators` collection. Display a list of authenticators to select the Google Authenticator for enrollment.
```

```java
case AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION:

    // There are multiple potential factors, for this example we are going to
    // assume Google Authenticator (OTP) is used
    Authenticator authenticator = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
            .filter(auth -> auth.getType().equals("otp"))
            .findFirst() // find the first "otp" factor or throw an exception
            .orElseThrow(() -> {
                String availableFactors = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
                        .map(auth -> auth.getLabel() + " - " + auth.getType())
                        .collect(Collectors.joining(", "));
                return new RuntimeException("OTP factor not found, existing options: " + availableFactors);
            });

    // Tell Okta which factor was selected, and go back into the state machine with the new response
    authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.selectAuthenticator(proceedContext, authenticator);
```

### 5: Retrieve shared secret and QR Code

> The next `AuthenticationResponse` object will contain information about the OTP factor and will contain a QR Code and shared secret.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The next `AuthenticationResponse` object contains information about the OTP factor and includes a QR Code and shared secret.
```

> > **NOTE:** the _shared secret_ is typically used when a QR code cannot be displayed or scanned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The shared secret is typically used when a QR code can't be displayed or scanned.
```

Reviewer 4: OK, so I'm a stickler for words... the word "typically" isn't needed.

> Display the QR code and/or shared secret to the user, so they can register the factor with Google Authenticator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Display the QR code and/or shared secret to the user to register the factor with Google Authenticator.
```

```java
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getSharedSecret()
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getQrcode()
```

> Prompt the user for a TOTP code, and continue the authentication flow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prompt the user for a TOTP code and continue the authentication flow:
```

> Prompt the user for a OTP code, and continue the authentication flow:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prompt the user for a TOTP code, and continue the authentication flow:
```

### 1: Build a sign-in page on the client

Build a sign-in page that capture's the user's name and password, as shown in the following example.

![Basic sign-in dialog](/img/authenticators/java-authenticators-signinform.png)

### 2: Authenticate the user credentials

> After a user initiates the sign-in flow by entering their username and password and then clicking **Sign In**, add the following code:

Author: ```suggestion
Add the following code to initiate the sign-in flow using the credentials from above.
```

```java

> // create an IDX Authentication Wrapper (can be an application scoped singleton)

Author: How singletons are handled is typically up to the framework the developer is using.
```suggestion
// Create a wrapper for the SDK, which may be a singleton with application scope.
```

IDXAuthenticationWrapper idxAuthenticationWrapper = new IDXAuthenticationWrapper();

// begin transaction
// The proceedContext needs to be persisted between interactions (e.g. stored in a HttpSession for web apps)
ProceedContext proceedContext = idxAuthenticationWrapper.begin().getProceedContext();

> // TODO: add device context

Reviewer 4: Ahh, so it's our TODO not the developer's. Is this something you're doing or is someone else on the hook for this?

> // TODO: add device context

Author: We are waiting on an SDK release to continue

> // set the user's credentials

Author: ```suggestion
// Set the user's credentials.
```

AuthenticationOptions authenticationOptions = new AuthenticationOptions(username, password);

> // start authentication flow

Author: ```suggestion
// Start the authentication flow.
```

> // start authentication flow

Author: ```suggestion
// Start the authentication flow.
```

AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.authenticate(authenticationOptions, proceedContext);
```

### 3: Handle the response from the sign-in flow

The `AuthenticationResponse` contains the current state of the authentication process, it could be a `SUCCESS` or may indicate more information is needed to complete the flow, for example, require an additional factor.

> Query the `authenticationStatus` property of the `AuthenticationResponse` object returned by `authenticate` to discover the current status of the authentication process.

Reviewer 4: Isn't this a repeat of the sentence above? If not, how's it different? Also "Query" is a term used for querying a database. If you want to use an action here, "Check" is probably more appropriate.

```java

> // Update the context each time a request is made to Okta

Author: ```suggestion
// Update the context each time a request is made to Okta.
```

> // Update the context each time a request is made to Okta

Author: ```suggestion
// Update the context each time a request is made to Okta.
```

> // make sure it is persisted for web applications

Reviewer 4: Change to active voice ("is persisted is passive and an odd tense). Also, what's the subject of this sentence, ProceedContext or web applications. I'm tempted to say the latter as you want to grab the attention of a reader creating a web app and have all others ignore it.) Perhaps something like

> // For web applications, ProceedContext must be persistent for ?the session?.

I think that's shorter, clearer, and emphasizes the importance (must).

proceedContext = authenticationResponse.getProceedContext();

> // get the authenticationStatus

Author: ```suggestion
```

AuthenticationStatus authenticationStatus = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticationStatus();

switch (authenticationStatus) {
    case SUCCESS:
        … your code …
    case PASSWORD_EXPIRED:
        … your code …
}
```

### 4: Select a possible authenticator factor

If you configured your Okta org correctly, you need to respond to two specific authenticator statuses to handle this scenario in addition to `SUCCESS` and `PASSWORD_EXPIRED`:

* `AWAITING_PROFILE_ENROLLMENT` that is covered in this section
* `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` that is covered in [the challenge flow section](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-challenge).

> The names of the authenticators available for enrollment or challenge can be found in the `AuthenticationResponse` object's `authenticators` collection. Display a list of authenticators to select the Google Authenticator for enrollment.

Author: ```suggestion
The names of the available authenticators are found in the `authenticators` collection of the `AuthenticationResponse`.

Display a selector with the list of available authenticators:
```

> **Note:** The `isChallengeFlow` session variable is set to `false` if the user needs to enroll Google Authenticator first, and `true` if they have already done so.

```java
case AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION:

    // There are multiple potential factors, for this example we are going to

>     // assume Google Authenticator (OTP) is used

Reviewer 4: A couple of things. First, the use of "we" is ambiguous: the "royal" we, you the developer, you the developer and this bit of code, ... It doesn't really help the developer and doesn't really introduce a "conversational tone."

Next, if memory servers, the best way to determine if it's Google Authenticator is to use the ID property (I think that's the correct property) as the value is unambiguous: `"google_otp"`.

I'd suggest rewriting the code to use the named string rather than just "otp" as that applies to several authenticators. That may obviate the need for the comment. If not, or if there's no time for a rewrite (or if you'll leave that as an exercise for the reader), then please update the comment as it doesn't start with the subject:

// This example assumes that Google Authenticator is the only OTP authenticator in Okta org policy.

Author: ```suggestion
    // There are multiple potential factors, for this it is assumed that
    // Google Authenticator (OTP) is used
```

    Authenticator authenticator = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
            .filter(auth -> auth.getType().equals("otp"))
            .findFirst() // find the first "otp" factor or throw an exception
            .orElseThrow(() -> {
                String availableFactors = authenticationResponse.getAuthenticators().stream()
                        .map(auth -> auth.getLabel() + " - " + auth.getType())
                        .collect(Collectors.joining(", "));
                return new RuntimeException("OTP factor not found, existing options: " + availableFactors);
            });

>     // Tell Okta which factor was selected, and go back into the state machine with the new response

Reviewer 4: The two clauses say much the same thing. How about:
// Update the response with the selected authenticator and send the result back to the server.

    authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.selectAuthenticator(proceedContext, authenticator);
```

### 5: Retrieve shared secret and QR Code

The next `AuthenticationResponse` object will contain information about the OTP factor and will contain a QR Code and shared secret.

> **NOTE:** the _shared secret_ is typically used when a QR code cannot be displayed or scanned.

Display the QR code and/or shared secret to the user, so they can register the factor with Google Authenticator.

```java
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getSharedSecret()
authenticationResponse.getContextualData().getQrcode()
```

Prompt the user for a OTP code, and continue the authentication flow:

```java

> // send the code to Okta, and go back into the state machine with the new response

Reviewer 4: // Send the code to Okta and handle the next response.

Author: ```suggestion
// Send the code to Okta and handle the next response.
```
